feat: added documentation for patternfly cli. (#5009)
patternfly/patternfly-org: packages/documentation-site/patternfly-docs/content/AI/patternfly-cli.md

---
id: PatternFly CLI
title: PatternFly CLI
section: AI
---

> The [PatternFly CLI](https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly-cli) is a command-line tool for scaffolding projects, performing code modifications, and running project-related tasks. It streamlines everyday development work and PatternFly upgrades. You can run it in the terminal on its own, or use it from an **AI-enabled editor** (for example [Cursor](https://www.cursor.com/)) so coding agents rely on the same predictable commands for scaffolding, updates, and git workflows. The published package is [`@patternfly/patternfly-cli` on npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@patternfly/patternfly-cli).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [PatternFly CLI](https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly-cli) is a command-line tool for scaffolding projects, performing code modifications, and running project-related tasks. It streamlines everyday development work and PatternFly upgrades, making it convenient and easy to work straight from the terminal. You can run it in the terminal on its own, or use it from an AI-enabled editor (such as [Cursor](https://www.cursor.com/)) so coding agents can rely on the same predictable commands for scaffolding, updates, and git workflows. The published package is [`@patternfly/patternfly-cli` on npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@patternfly/patternfly-cli).
```

Reviewer: idk if the "convenient" part is necessary, just thought it might help frame things for non technical people that end up here, but you can ignore that part if you think it's redundant

The npm package installs two equivalent entry points: `patternfly-cli` and the shorter alias `pfcli`. The examples below use `patternfly-cli`; substitute `pfcli` if you prefer.

## What does the PatternFly CLI help with?

- **Project scaffolding:** Quickly set up new PatternFly based projects for development and prototyping via predefined templates.
- **Code modifications:** Automate repetitive code changes to help accelerate PatternFly version upgrades.

> - **Task runner:** Execute project-related tasks efficiently, such as source code management and task running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Task execution:** Run project-related tasks such as committing and pushing changes, pulling updates, and deploying your app to GitHub Pages.
```

## How do I set up PatternFly CLI?

### Prerequisites
There are a few key prerequisites to meet before using PatternFly CLI. For macOS, WSL, and Linux, we recommend using [install script](#install-script-macos-and-linux) to address the following prerequisites (you might still need administrator access for system packages). For a Windows-based system, you will need to install the following items manually:

- **[Node.js](https://nodejs.org/)** (Supported versions: 20–24) and **[npm](https://www.npmjs.com/)**
- **[Corepack](https://nodejs.org/api/corepack.html)** (Included with Node.js and enabled via `corepack enable` after installing npm)

> - **[GitHub CLI](https://cli.github.com/)** (`gh`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/) (Versions 20–24) and [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/)
- [Corepack](https://nodejs.org/api/corepack.html), which is included with Node.js. After installing npm, enable via `corepack enable`
- [GitHub CLI](https://cli.github.com/)
```

Author: Done

## Installation

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PatternFly CLI can be installed globally using a one-line install script (macOS and Linux) or npm (Windows).

To remove the CLI, see the [Uninstall section of the README](https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly-cli#uninstall).

```
do you want to mention the uninstall instructions here too?

Author: I added the uninstall to the bottom of this page.

### Install script (macOS and Linux)

You can pipe the repository install script into `bash`. This installs Node.js with [nvm](https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm) when `node` is not available, enables Corepack, installs GitHub CLI when it is missing, and installs the CLI globally from npm:

```sh
curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/patternfly/patternfly-cli/main/scripts/install.sh | bash
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To inspect the script before running it, download it first:

curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/patternfly/patternfly-cli/main/scripts/install.sh -o install-patternfly-cli.sh
bash install-patternfly-cli.sh

```
do you wanna include this, which is in the readme?

Author: This actually runs the command to install it typing this. It won't download it to view it. This should remain here, as it won't change unless we rename the script.

The script might prompt you to include `sudo` when your system package manager installs GitHub CLI.

### Windows

After installing the [prerequisites](#prerequisites) on your machine, install the published package globally:

```sh
npm install -g @patternfly/patternfly-cli
```

## How do I use PatternFly CLI?

After installation, you can verify the latest version of the CLI has been installed by running the following terminal command:

```sh
patternfly-cli --version
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Typical workflow

If you're starting a new project and publishing it, this is the usual sequence:

[CODE FORMAT THIS]
patternfly-cli create my-app   # create a new project from a template
cd my-app
patternfly-cli init            # set up Git and connect to GitHub
patternfly-cli save            # commit and push your changes
patternfly-cli deploy          # publish to GitHub Pages

For an existing project, use patternfly-cli update to migrate to a newer PatternFly version.
```

Reviewer: Up to you - do you want to have a beginning to end example like this? 

sorry I couldn't get the code block format to work here - so you'll need to replace "[CODE FORMAT THIS]"

Author: there's an example above for this.

Reviewer: which example? or do you just mean the general setup instructions? if this isn't helpful though, we can skip it

### Available CLI commands
Once the PatternFly CLI is installed, you can run the following commands via `patternfly-cli [command]`:

> | Command | Usage |

Reviewer: this table isn't rendering correctly, though I"m not sure why. Maybe needs a blank line beforehand? or possibly the em dash encoding is a problem

Author: fixed it.

Author: Fixed

| --- | --- |
| `create` | Create a new project from the available templates. |
| `list` | List all available templates (built-in and optional custom). |

> | `update` | Update your project to a newer version. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `update` | Migrate your project to a newer PatternFly version using codemods, which handle import changes, component renames, and other breaking changes automatically. |
```

Author: Done

| `cli-upgrade` | Upgrade the globally installed CLI to the latest npm release. It runs `npm install -g @patternfly/patternfly-cli@latest`&mdash;use your package manager’s equivalent if you did not install with npm. |
| `init` | Initialize a git repository and optionally create a GitHub repository. |
| `save` | Commit and push changes to the current branch. |
| `load` | Pull the latest updates from GitHub. |
| `deploy` | Build and deploy your app to GitHub Pages. |

For the most up-to-date flags and behavior guidance, refer to [PatternFly CLI README](https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly-cli/blob/main/README.md) on GitHub.

> ### Custom templates

Reviewer: do you want to have a section that overviews the built-in templates too, or do you anticipate that changing too often? If so, even just linking to https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly-cli/blob/main/src/templates.ts (or wherever) would be helpful I think

Author: Added it.

---
id: PatternFly CLI
title: PatternFly CLI
section: AI
---

The [PatternFly CLI](https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly-cli) is a command-line tool for scaffolding projects, performing code modifications, and running project-related tasks. It streamlines everyday development work and PatternFly upgrades, making it convenient and easy to work straight from the terminal. You can run it in the terminal on its own, or use it from an AI-enabled editor (such as [Cursor](https://www.cursor.com/)) so coding agents can rely on the same predictable commands for scaffolding, updates, and git workflows. The published package is [`@patternfly/patternfly-cli` on npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@patternfly/patternfly-cli).

> The npm package installs two equivalent entry points: `patternfly-cli` and the shorter alias `pfcli`. The examples below use `patternfly-cli`; substitute `pfcli` if you prefer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The npm package installs two equivalent entry points: `patternfly-cli` and the shorter alias `pfcli`. The examples below use `patternfly-cli`, but you can substitute `pfcli` in your own usage if you prefer.
```

```sh
patternfly-cli --version
```

### Available CLI commands
Once the PatternFly CLI is installed, you can run the following commands via `patternfly-cli [command]`:

| Command | Usage |
| --- | --- |
| `create` | Create a new project from the available templates. |
| `list` | List all available templates (built-in and optional custom). |
| `update` | Migrate your project to a newer PatternFly version using codemods, which handle import changes, component renames, and other breaking changes automatically.|
| `cli-upgrade` | Upgrade the globally installed CLI to the latest npm release. It runs `npm install -g @patternfly/patternfly-cli@latest`&mdash;use your package manager’s equivalent if you did not install with npm. |
| `init` | Initialize a git repository and optionally create a GitHub repository. |
| `save` | Commit and push changes to the current branch. |
| `load` | Pull the latest updates from GitHub. |
| `deploy` | Build and deploy your app to GitHub Pages. |

For the most up-to-date flags and behavior guidance, refer to [PatternFly CLI README](https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly-cli/blob/main/README.md) on GitHub.

### Predefined templates

> Built-in templates ship with the CLI. Each row is the template `name` you pass to `patternfly-cli create` (or choose from the interactive prompt). To print the list from your installed version, run `patternfly-cli list`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following predefined templates ship with PatternFly CLI:
```

| Template name | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `starter` | Starter template for a PatternFly React TypeScript project |
| `compass-starter` | Starter template for a PatternFly Compass theme TypeScript project | 
| `nextjs-starter` | Starter template for a PatternFly Next.js project |

> Template definitions in source: [patternfly-cli `src/templates.ts`](https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly-cli/blob/main/src/templates.ts).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use a template, pass the template name to `patternfly-cli create [template name]` or choose the template from the interactive prompt triggered by the generic `patternfly-cli create` comman. To print a list of all templates from your installed version, run `patternfly-cli list`.

Template definitions can be found in the [patternfly-cli repo](https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly-cli/blob/main/src/templates.ts).
```

### Custom templates

> In addition to the built-in templates, you can add your own templates by passing a JSON file with `--template-file` (or `-t`). Custom templates are merged with the built-in list&mdash;if a custom template has the same `name` as a built-in template, the custom definition is used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the predefined templates, you can add your own templates by passing a JSON file with `--template-file` (or `-t`). Custom templates are merged with the predefined list&mdash;if a custom template has the same `name` as a predefined template, the custom definition is used.
```

You can pipe the repository install script into `bash`. This installs Node.js with [nvm](https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm) when `node` is not available, enables Corepack, installs GitHub CLI when it is missing, and installs the CLI globally from npm:

```sh
curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/patternfly/patternfly-cli/main/scripts/install.sh | bash
```

The script might prompt you to include `sudo` when your system package manager installs GitHub CLI.

### Windows

After installing the [prerequisites](#prerequisites) on your machine, install the published package globally:

```sh
npm install -g @patternfly/patternfly-cli
```

## How do I use PatternFly CLI?

After installation, you can verify the latest version of the CLI has been installed by running the following terminal command:

```sh
patternfly-cli --version
```
### Typical workflow

If you're starting a new project and publishing it, this is the usual sequence:

[CODE FORMAT THIS]
patternfly-cli create my-app   # create a new project from a template
cd my-app
patternfly-cli init            # set up Git and connect to GitHub
patternfly-cli save            # commit and push your changes

> patternfly-cli deploy          # publish to GitHub Pages

Reviewer: this needs the code formatting applied and then remove line 58
